GreenServ: Energy-Efficient Context-Aware Dynamic Routing
for Multi-Model LLM Inference
ANONYMOUS AUTHOR(S)
Large language models (LLMs) demonstrate remarkable capabilities, but their broad deployment is limited
by significant computational resource demands, particularly energy consumption during inference. Static,
one-model-fits-all inference strategies are often inefficient, as they do not exploit the diverse range of available
models or adapt to varying query requirements.
This paper presents GreenServ, a dynamic, context-aware routing framework that optimizes the trade-off
between inference accuracy and energy efficiency. GreenServ employs contextual multi-armed bandit (MAB)
algorithms to learn adaptive routing policies online. By extracting lightweight contextual features from each
query, including task type, semantic cluster, and text complexity, the framework routes queries to the most
suitable model from a heterogeneous pool, based on observed accuracy and energy usage. This approach
operates under partial feedback, eliminates the need for extensive offline calibration, and streamlines the
integration of new models into the inference pipeline.
We evaluated GreenServ using multiple MAB strategies in five benchmark tasks and a pool of 16 contemporary open-access LLMs. Experimental results show that GreenServ consistently outperforms static
(single-model) and random baselines. In particular, compared to random routing, contextual GreenServ
bandits achieved a 22% increase in accuracy while reducing cumulative energy consumption by 31%. Finally,
we evaluated GreenServ with RouterBench, achieving an average AIQ and accuracy of 0.637 and 71.7%,
respectively, with a peak accuracy of 75.7%.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Computational Sustainability, Large Language Model, Inference Routing
1 Introduction
The rise of large language models (LLMs) is considered one of the major breakthroughs in machine
learning, opening a new era of artificial intelligence (AI) with new capabilities such as human-like
text and image generation. LLM-based autonomous agents have become an integral part of various
applications and workflows, accelerating automation in areas such as customer service and market
research [26]. However, training and the use of LLMs require a considerable amount of resources
(e.g. energy) that raise several concerns about their computational sustainability [18].
Although approaches to reducing training costs for LLM have received a lot of attention, inference
resource demands are often overlooked. In fact, the cumulative inference energy can exceed the
training energy: a single ChatGPT query is estimated to consume approximately 2.9 W/h of energy
for a total amount of 10 TeraW/h per year [38]. Data centers hosting both training and inference
already draw an appreciable share of global electricity, and their demand continues to grow [39].
Current LLM inference often relies on static strategies one-model-fits-all, routing all queries
to the same large model regardless of complexity or quality [23]. While this dominates industry
use, it wastes resources: studies show that many noncritical tasks (e.g., basic translation) can be
handled by smaller, cheaper models with minimal quality loss [31, 55]. The open source ecosystem
adds to the challenge by offering over 230,000 text generation models on platforms like HuggingFace [4], including fine-tuned variants and optimized architectures (quantized, distilled, etc.),
creating opportunities but complicating the decision process.
In fact, selecting an optimal LLM is not trivial. First, non-expert users often lack the technical
expertise or explicit criteria needed to evaluate trade-offs between accuracy, cost, and latency,
leading many to default to larger models assuming better capabilities. Second, the landscape is
highly dynamic: leaderboards such as the HuggingFace Open LLM1
and the CRFM HELM2
show
1https://huggingface.co/open-llm-leaderboard
2https://crfm.stanford.edu/helm/capabilities/latest/
2 Anon.
that the top 50 models vary widely in size and specialization, and choices that are near-optimal
today may become outdated within months. Third, performance is highly task-dependent; for
example, smaller models can match or even outperform larger ones on focused tasks such as
MMLU [35], but tend to underperform on broader challenges such as summarization [32].
To overcome the limitations of single model inference and improve the efficiency and performance of LLM inference, researchers have introduced two main computation paradigms: model
cascading [28] and routing-based inference [49]. Cascading approaches attempt to reduce cost by
initially using a small, lightweight model to handle the request while then iteratively selecting more
capable models until the output does not meet predefined quality thresholds. Although this method
can improve efficiency, it often involves multiple inferences per request by design, significantly
increasing both latency and computational cost [23].
On the other hand, routing-based methods, such as RouteLLM [49], MixLLM [58], LLMBandit [45],
and Eagle[62], aim to assign each inference request to the most appropriate model in a single step,
based on a learned/heuristic decision process. Despite these approaches show promising results;
they are still affected by key limitations.
Limited continual learning. Most routers lack continual learning capabilities, operating
statically after initial calibration. This makes them vulnerable to query distribution shifts and model
degradation.
Reliance on proxy cost metrics. Quality-cost trade-offs often rely on synthetic proxies (API
prices, token budgets) over actual production metrics like GPU utilization or energy use. They do
not directly measure real resource consumption, limiting dynamic optimization.
Underutilization of new models due to calibration overhead. The availability of opensource model repositories with a diverse range of capabilities is constantly increasing, but many
remain underexplored due to the calibration overhead associated with incorporating them. In fact,
no approach supports zero-calibration integration, leading to underutilization of available model
capabilities despite growing repository diversity.
To overcome these limitations, we propose GreenServ, a dynamic, context-aware LLM inference routing framework that assigns user queries to the most suitable model in its pool based on
lightweight contextual features (i.e., task type, semantic context, and text complexity) extracted
from incoming user queries and accumulated knowledge about models’ performance (i.e. accuracy
and energy consumption). GreenServ learns an adaptive routing policy online to identify the most
suitable model at runtime by using a contextual multi-armed bandit (MAB) algorithm [42]. This also
enables the online integration of new models without requiring extensive offline calibration.
Experimental results show that GreenServ consistently outperforms single-model and random
baselines by achieving superior energy-accuracy operating points. Compared to random routing,
GreenServ achieved accuracy gains of 22% while reducing cumulative energy consumption by
31%. Furthermore, results show that they operate consistently close to or beyond the static optimal
solutions, indicating that GreenServ allows effective control of the precision-energy trade-off
based on the configurable parameter 𝜆. The ablation study of contextual characteristics shows a
substantial impact of the task type characteristic, dropping the median cumulative regret to ≈ 400.
This identifies the task type as the most informative component of the context to guide model
selection in our setup. Moreover, the results confirm a successful adaptation of GreenServ to the
introduction of models into the model pool by integrating new and better performing models into its
routing strategy. Finally, the overhead results show that the total average overhead per query ranges
between 6.68 and 7.77 ms, when processed sequentially, which indicates a negligible overhead
GreenServ compared to the general inference time. Finally, when evaluated with RouterBench [37],
GreenServ achieves an average AIQ and accuracy of 0.637 and of 71.7% respectively, with a peak
accuracy of 75.7%.
GreenServ: Energy-Efficient Context-Aware Dynamic Routing for Multi-Model LLM Inference 3
In summary, this work provides the following key contributions.
An adaptive context-aware LLM routing framework. We propose an LLM routing framework
capable of effectively balancing the trade-off between accuracy and energy consumption while
meeting latency requirements. By leveraging a MAB algorithm, it assigns user’s queries to the most
suitable available model, and it is capable of integrating new and better performing models into its
routing strategy without requiring expensive offline calibration.
A multi-feature query context representation. We propose a multi-feature query representation (i.e., task type, semantic context, and text complexity) as a structured context vector and we
study the impact of both single and combined features through an ablation study.
The study of 4 different MAB strategies. We implemented and compared the performances
of 4 different MAB strategies (i.e., 𝜖-Greedy, context-aware 𝜖-Greedy, LinUCB, and Contextual
Thompson Sampling (CTS)) to 4 baselines (i.e., random routing, smallest model, largest model, most
accurate model) using 5 benchmark tasks and a pool of 16 open-access LLMs from HuggingFace.
In addition, we also performed a trade-off analysis to understand how GreenServ behaves for
different accuracy- energy-consumption ratio.
An extensive empirical evaluation. In addition to the ablation study for context characteristics
and the evaluation of the four MAB strategies, we performed specific experiments to study the
adaptability to model addition, performed an overhead analysis, and evaluated GreenServ using
RouterBench [37]. Finally, we analyzed the time and space complexity of our router agent.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. § 2 discusses and categorizes related work,
identifying key research gaps. § 3 provides definitions and the necessary preliminary details for
our contextual routing problem. § 4 formalizes the problem statements. § 5 presents GreenServ,
including its system architecture and a thorough description of the proposed solution. § 6 outlines
the implementation details. § 7 reports the empirical evaluation and results, discusses the main
findings, and highlights current limitations. Finally, § 8 offers concluding remarks and directions
for future work.
2 Related Work
Inference routing optimizes LLM inference by assigning specific models to handle different types
of queries [49]. The process maps input requests to particular LLMs from an heterogeneous pool,
which can vary in terms of parameter sizes, architectures, or optimization levels. This approach
ensures that computational resources are allocated according to the characteristics of each query.
Static Routing Systems. Early LLM routing works used static, pre-deployment calibration strategies. For example, Tryage [34] used BERT embeddings for classification-based routing, achieving
50.9% accuracy. TABI [59] focused on complexity-based routing to reduce latency by 21-40%. RouterBench [37] introduced an evaluation framework, while Hybrid LLM [27] leveraged meta-learning
to reduce large model calls by 40%. Characterized by pre-deployment calibration (PD) and fixed
policies (FP), these methods lack adaptability to dynamic environments and evolving models.
Embedding Representations and Learning-based Routing Systems. Recent works on model
routing focus on advanced training methodologies. RouteLLM [49], for example, introduced
preference-data-based routing using matrix factorization, demonstrating up to 70% cost reduction
while preserving performance. Smoothie [33] introduced label-free routing via embedding-based
similarity comparison and latent variable graphical models, eliminating the need for labeled data.
RouterDC [24] employs dual contrastive learning for query-based routing, and EmbedLLM [63]
developed compact model representations using encoder-decoder architectures. Furthermore,
GraphRouter [29] uses graph neural networks to model task-query-LLM interactions. These systems demonstrated improved routing accuracy through advanced representation learning. For new
model additions, they lack adaptability for fast learning and the addition of models at runtime.
4 Anon.
Dynamic and Adaptive Routing Systems. The most recent works have focused on dynamic
adaptation and runtime learning capabilities. TensorOpera [56] employed K-nearest neighbors
for efficient inference, while Universal Model Routing [40] introduced cluster-based representation for unseen test-time LLMs, achieving dynamic model integration. LLMBandit [45] proposed
preference-conditioned dynamic routing using multi-armed bandit formulation, enabling runtime
preference specification and achieving significant cost reductions. MixLLM [58] presented the
contextual-bandit-based routing, incorporating tag-enhanced embeddings and continual learning
capabilities, achieving 97.25% of GPT-4’s quality at 24.18% of the cost.
These systems represent significant progress in adaptive routing, moving from static configurations toward dynamic, learning-based approaches. Our approach extends this trajectory by
combining minimal offline calibration with continuous online learning (hybrid calibration), enabling policy evolution through contextual bandits, supporting dynamic model integration without
retraining, and optimizing multiple objectives using direct energy measurements rather than proxy
metrics. We present a comprehensive routing framework capable of handling complex, evolving
LLM ecosystems while maintaining near Pareto-optimal accuracy-energy trade-offs.
3 Definitions and Preliminaries
This section formalizes the routing problem in which we aim to dynamically assign incoming
requests to a single model from a pool of heterogeneous LLMs while balancing two primary
objectives: accuracy and energy-consumption. In particular, Section 3.1 introduces the general
problem setting and fundamental notations. § 3.2 defines the core performance metrics. § 4.3 shows
how the elaborated routing problem based on input features and partial feedback structure leads to
a contextual multi-armed bandit problem that will serve as the basis for our solution approach.
3.1 Problem Overview and Notation
We consider an inference system that processes a sequential stream of user queries {𝑞𝑡 }
𝑇
𝑡=1
. Each
query 𝑞𝑡 arrives at a discrete timestep 𝑡 = 1, 2, . . . ,𝑇 , where T is the total number of queries.
Each query 𝑞𝑡 may vary in specific characteristics (e.g., task type, text complexity), and thus,
may require different levels of model capacity to be answered effectively. We assume access to a
pool of 𝐾 heterogeneous candidate LLMs: 𝑀 = {𝑚1,𝑚2, . . . ,𝑚𝐾 }. Each 𝑚𝑘 ∈ 𝑀 is a model with
distinct characteristics. Possible characteristics include (i) architecture and parameter count, (ii)
fine-tuning on domain (e.g., medical, legal), and (iii) quantization level (e.g., 8-bit, 4-bit precision).
When query 𝑞𝑡 arrives, the system’s routing policy 𝜋 selects exactly one model 𝑚𝑡 for inference:
𝑚𝑡 = 𝜋 (𝑞𝑡). (1)
The policy aims to balance two key objectives – accuracy and efficiency – based on measured
historical performance of each model in related contexts.
3.2 Metrics
The following section specifies how we define and measure accuracy and efficiency, which are
then condensed into a MOOP through scalarization (see § 4.2) to form the basis of our routing
problem. Since the routing policy aims to balance the accuracy of the model’s output against the
energy consumed, we require metrics that quantify both and are measurable in an online setting.
The following subsections detail these core metrics.
3.2.1 Accuracy. We denote 𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑚 (𝑞𝑡) as the accuracy of model 𝑚’s response to query 𝑞𝑡
. Defining
a single accuracy metric across all LLM tasks is challenging. For tasks with clear ground truth,
objective metrics like Exact Match (EM) [52], ROUGE [46], or BLEU [50] are applicable. However,
GreenServ: Energy-Efficient Context-Aware Dynamic Routing for Multi-Model LLM Inference 5
evaluating open-ended generation often requires subjective assessments (e.g., user feedback),
which are difficult to automate and simulate reliably [22]. Therefore, for deterministic evaluation
within the scope of this work, we focus exclusively on tasks where accuracy can be measured
objectively against an available ground truth using such unambiguous metrics. We assume𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑚 (𝑞𝑡)
is normalized to the interval [0, 1], where higher values indicate a higher accuracy.
3.2.2 Energy Consumption. Efficiency in our setting refers to the effective utilization of computational resources to generate responses. It can be assessed though different aspects such as processing
speed, memory footprint, or energy consumption. Among these factors, energy consumption stands
out as a traceable and broadly relevant indicator for evaluating efficiency. Generally, the more
efficient a system, the less energy consumption is required to produce responses of comparable
quality, given the same hardware and software configuration.
Thus, energy consumption will serve as our proxy metric to judge efficiency. It can be formally
defined by integrating the instantaneous power draw 𝑃𝑚 (𝑡) of model m over inference duration
𝑇proc(𝑚,𝑞𝑡 )
:
𝐶𝑚 (𝑞𝑡) =
∫ 𝑇proc (𝑚,𝑞𝑡 )
0
𝑃𝑚 (𝜏) 𝑑𝜏 (2)
Within our theoretical MOOP, 𝐶𝑚 (𝑞𝑡) thus defines a theoretical measure of efficiency that must
be approximated to allow experimental evaluation of our proposed solution.
4 Problem Formulation
In this section, we provide a formal definition for our multi-objective routing problem. Building
on the definitions introduced, we formalize the inherent trade-offs between model quality and
resource utilization. In addition, we discuss how latency differs from other efficiency aspects ( § 4.1)
and how to effectively incorporate it into the proposed MOOP ( § 4.2). Furthermore, we introduce
the concept of Pareto optimality and how multiple objectives can be reduced to a single scalar.
4.1 Latency Constraint Feasibility
Inference latency represents the time from query submission to response. The total latency incorporates many components such as data transfer, optimization-related overhead, queuing delays,
and actual inference cost.
However, the latency components, such as data transfer and queuing delays, depend on specific deployment environments and operating conditions, and introduce strong deviations. These
deviations depend on geographic proximity between user and service provider, workload level,
load-balancing mechanisms, etc (see § 6 for further discussion). Therefore, to model latency cost
applicable across diverse deployment conditions, GreenServ considers the following two latency
costs: (i) inference optimization cost 𝐿𝑜𝑝𝑡 (𝑞𝑡) representing pre-inference overhead, and (ii) the
inference processing time itself 𝐿𝑚 (𝑞𝑡). Thus, the total inference cost 𝐿total is defined as:
𝐿total(𝑚, 𝑞𝑡) = 𝐿𝑜𝑝𝑡 (𝑞𝑡) + 𝐿𝑚 (𝑞𝑡). (3)
The latency has two key implications. First, it indicates approximate resource utilization,
depending on the inference pipeline, prolonged latency may indicate higher resource utilization
(e.g., extended GPU execution time). However, this notion can also be accounted for through energy
consumption measurements. Second, it also measures user experience- increased latency negatively
impact user experience or Quality-of-Service (QoS) constraints. However, the relationship between
latency and perceived user experience is often not linear. Users typically tolerate latency up to a
certain threshold, beyond which satisfaction declines sharply [48]. To reflect this, we introduce
6 Anon.
maximum acceptable latency 𝐿𝑚𝑎𝑥 . Accordingly, we define the set of feasible models for query 𝑞𝑡 as:
𝑀
∗
𝑡 = {𝑚 ∈ 𝑀|𝐿𝑚 (𝑞𝑡) ≤ 𝐿𝑚𝑎𝑥,𝑡 }. (4)
A model exceeding 𝐿𝑚𝑎𝑥,𝑡 is considered infeasible and is discarded in the candidate selection at
time step 𝑡, analogous to established QoS techniques [61].
4.2 Multi-Objective Optimization via Scalarization
In multi-objective optimization, the concept of Pareto optimality [47] formalizes an ideal trade-off
between competing goals: a solution is Pareto optimal if no objective can be improved without
degrading another. The set of all non-dominated solutions defines the Pareto front, offering choices
aligned with varying user preferences (e.g., prioritizing accuracy vs. energy consumption). However,
direct optimization or selection from the Pareto front is infeasible in dynamic online settings with
incomplete information.
To address this, we employ objective scalarization, specifically, the Weighted Sum Method, which
consolidates multiple objectives into a single scalar reward [47]. For our routing problem, we
combine accuracy and energy consumption for a query 𝑞𝑡 as follows:
𝑟𝑡 (𝑚, 𝑞𝑡) = 𝛼𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑚 (𝑞𝑡) − 𝛽𝐶𝑚 (𝑞𝑡), subject to 𝑚 ∈ 𝑀
∗
𝑡
. (5)
where 𝛼 = 1 − 𝜆, 𝛽 = 𝜆, 0 ≤ 𝜆 ≤ 1. This parameter 𝜆 conveniently allows interpolation between
accuracy-only (𝜆 = 0) and energy- only (𝜆 = 1) policies. While this approach assumes a fixed rate
of trade-off between objectives, it enables efficient, adaptive decision making in practice. In our
experiments, we perform a parameter sweep over 𝜆 to evaluate these trade-offs.
4.3 Bandit Problem Formulation
4.3.1 Partial Observability and Feedback. In dynamic online settings, it is infeasible to observe the
performance of all possible configurations due to computational constraints and the continuous
nature of the search space. In our case, full observability refers to scenarios where the performance
of every candidate model on every query 𝑞 ∈ 𝑄 is available.
However, in practice, the system can only observe the performance of the model 𝑚𝑡 chosen for
each query 𝑞𝑡
. The outcomes for all unselected models, that is, what would have occurred had a
different model been selected—remain unknown. This is commonly referred to as partial feedback
or bandit feedback [43], which stands in contrast to full observability. This fundamental constraint
motivates the application of Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) algorithms for dynamic model selection.
In that regard, in GreenServ, each query 𝑞𝑡 corresponds to a distinct decision point in time,
and each feasible model 𝑚𝑡 ∈ 𝑀∗
𝑡
represents an arm (or action). After selecting a model 𝑚𝑡 for the
query 𝑞𝑡
, the system observes the scalarized reward based on the model’s accuracy and energy
consumption during inference, while the performance of other models at time step 𝑡 remains
unknown.
4.3.2 Context-aware Bandits. One key extension of classical MAB algorithms is the inclusion of
context features, described in § 5.2 and § 5.3. Instead of treating all queries identically, contextual
bandits leverage relationships between input characteristics and reward outcomes [44]. Utilizing
context vector 𝑥𝑡 extracted of 𝑞𝑡
(see § 5.2), we aim to learn a policy:
𝜋 : 𝑥𝑡 → 𝑚𝑡
(6)
that selects a feasible model 𝑚𝑡 ∈ 𝑀∗
𝑡
.
Since different queries may demand varying model capacities, this approach is expected to
outperform static or non-contextual strategies given enough time to learn the policy. Over time,
the policy continuously gains information and refines its estimates to approximate the true reward
GreenServ: Energy-Efficient Context-Aware Dynamic Routing for Multi-Model LLM Inference 7
functions for 𝑥𝑡
. This allows the system to adapt to new query distributions and handle integration
of new models gracefully.
4.4 Regret-Based Evaluation
To evaluate the performance of a policy, we measure the performance gap using the concept
of regret [43]. It reflects an essential aspect of bandit problems that try to learn to select nearoptimal actions over time based on partial feedback. Regret quantifies the gap between the observed
performance of the chosen action (selected model) and the performance that could have been
achieved by selecting the optimal action in hindsight. The oracle policy with complete knowledge
of model performances would have selected the optimal model:
𝑚
∗
𝑡 = arg max
𝑚∈𝑀∗
𝑡
𝑟𝑡 (𝑚, 𝑞𝑡), (7)
where 𝑟𝑡 (𝑚𝑡
, 𝑞𝑡) is the reward function introduced in § 4.2 and 𝑀∗
𝑡
again defines the set of feasible
models at time step 𝑡. Following this, instantaneous regret is defined as:
Δ𝑡 = 𝑟𝑡 (𝑚
∗
𝑡
) − 𝑟𝑡 (𝑚𝑡), (8)
where 𝑚𝑡
is the model selected by the non-oracle routing policy. This quantifies the missed
out on reward due to selecting a sub-optimal model. If the optimal model was chosen, meaning
𝜋 (𝑥𝑡) = 𝑚𝑡 = 𝑚∗
𝑡
, regret is zero.
After 𝑇 iterations, cumulative regret is defined as:
Regret(𝑇 ) =
∑︁
𝑇
𝑡=1

𝑟𝑡 (𝑚
∗
𝑡
) − 𝑟𝑡 (𝑚𝑡)

. (9)
The routing strategy aims to minimize Regret(𝑇 ) as 𝑡 grows and approximate the oracle policy.
Since MAB is optimizing a multi-objective trade-off between accuracy and energy-efficiency,
minimizing regret should line up with Pareto Optimality. Over time, an effective policy aims to
learn to select models that approximate the context-specific Pareto fronts and, thus, discard models
that are consistently dominated.
5 GreenServ: Learning Dynamic Context-Aware Routing in Multi-Model LLM
Inference
In this section, we first define the system model along with its core components. Subsequently, we
present the solution methodology for GreenServ.
5.1 System Model
Figure 1 illustrates the system model of GreenServ. The approach comprises three main steps: (i)
Query Context Generator, which extracts the necessary metadata to construct a query-specific
context vector, capturing the unique characteristics of each query; (ii) Router Agent Trainer,
where we train an agent using bandit learning to identify efficient configurations and (iii) Online
Deployment, in which the trained router is deployed to handle inference requests in real time.
Furthermore, GreenServ is capable of adapting to the dynamic addition of new models to the
existing model pool.
5.2 Query Context Generator
The Query Context Generator processes each incoming query through three parallel components:
Task Classifier, Semantic Clustering, and Query Complexity Assessor. These modules extract three
key features: Task Type, which captures the overall intent of the query [37]; Cluster, which reflect
8 Anon.
Fig. 1. The system model of GreenServ.
semantic context by grouping similar queries via embedding-based clustering; and Complexity Score,
which quantifies textual complexity, serving as a proxy for processing load [59]. These features
are then combined into a context vector 𝑥𝑡
. By encapsulating multiple dimensions of the query, 𝑥𝑡
allows the router to make informed decisions about model selection to effectively balance inference
performance against energy efficiency.
5.2.1 Task Classifier. We rely on a lightweight text classification approach to identify high-level
task types (e.g., summarization, QA). Specifically, we train Logistic Regression (LR) model on top of
semantic embeddings [20].
We extract the instruction text 𝑞instr,𝑡 from the initial lines of the prompt 𝑞𝑡
, following the common
structure of instruction-based tasks. Its embedding 𝑒instr,𝑡 = embedding(𝑞instr,𝑡) is computed using
a pre-trained transformer model [53], yielding a semantic vector representation.
An LR model is then trained using cross-entropy loss over labeled pairs (𝑒instr,𝑡,𝑙𝑡), where 𝑙𝑡
denotes the ground-truth label [20]. The probability distribution is modeled as
𝑝(𝑙 | 𝑒instr,𝑡) = 𝜎(𝑊 𝑒instr,𝑡 + 𝑏), (10)
with parameters 𝑊 and 𝑏 optimized to learn a decision boundary for classification.
For training data, we sample a small portion of our evaluation dataset described in §7.1.2. Each
query is annotated with a ground-truth task label based on its dataset of origin. We split the data
into training and validation subsets, train the LR model, and evaluate its performance on the
validation set using standard classification metrics such as the F1 score [51]. After training, we
store the LR parameters for further use. The resulting model is a simple classifier that extracts
the discrete task label. We specifically choose LR for its computational simplicity, speed, and low
resource footprint to avoid excessive offline overhead.
GreenServ: Energy-Efficient Context-Aware Dynamic Routing for Multi-Model LLM Inference 9
5.2.2 Semantic Clustering. For grouping the queries into domain clusters, we begin with embedding
the entire query 𝑞𝑡 using a pre-trained transformer-based embedding model [53]:
𝑒𝑓 𝑢𝑙𝑙,𝑡 = embedding(𝑞𝑡). (11)
Utilizing these full embeddings, we perform an online K-Means clustering algorithm [21] with a
fixed number of clusters, 𝐾 (specified in §7.1), to group queries based on semantic similarity. The
algorithm assigns a query to the cluster with the most similar centroid by maximizing the cosine
similarity between the query’s embedding and the cluster centroids:
𝑐𝑡 = arg max
𝑐
𝑒full,𝑡 · 𝜇𝑐
∥𝑒full,𝑡 ∥ ∥𝜇𝑐 ∥
. (12)
The centroids 𝜇𝑐 are updated online based on the number of points assigned to the cluster so far
(𝑁𝑐 ) as new queries 𝑒full,𝑡 are observed:
𝜇𝑐𝑡 ← 𝜇𝑐𝑡 +
1
𝑁𝑐𝑡 + 1
(𝑒full,𝑡 − 𝜇𝑐𝑡
), (13)
where 𝑐𝑡
is the cluster assigned to the current query 𝑒full,𝑡 and 𝑁𝑐𝑡
is the count of previous points
assigned to that cluster. This implements a standard incremental update with a decaying learning
rate.
Online K-Means is chosen for its ability to adapt centroids incrementally without storing all
past embeddings or requiring pre-determined clusters. The number of clusters K is fixed (value
specified in §7.1) as a tunable hyperparameter to balance granularity and stability. Initial centroids
are chosen from the first K distinct query embeddings. The online update allows for the cluster
centroids to incrementally adapt to shifts in the topics of incoming queries over time. Cluster label
𝑐𝑡 represents the semantic domain (or potentially topic) of a query 𝑞𝑡
.
5.2.3 Query Complexity Assessor. We calculate a single numeric score that represents the complexity of query 𝑞𝑡 based on the Flesch Reading Ease formula [30]:
𝑝(𝑞𝑡) = 206.835 − 1.015 ·

Words𝑡
Sentences𝑡

− 84.6 ·

Syllables𝑡
Words𝑡

. (14)
For each 𝑞, this results in a value ∈ [0, 100] where a low score indicates high text complexity. To
convert this numerical score into a categorical feature suitable for the context vector, we bin the
scores into 𝑁bins distinct categories using equal-width binning. Again, the specific number of bins
(𝑁bins) and the corresponding score ranges are detailed in the evaluation setup ( §7.1).
5.2.4 Context Vector. Our context vector encodes relevant characteristics of a query:
𝑥𝑡 = [𝑙𝑡
, 𝑐𝑡
, 𝑝𝑡] (15)
The resulting vector is forwarded to the router (described in § 5.3), which aims to leverage
these features to make more informed, query-dependent model choices. For the contextual bandit
algorithms introduced in the next section, categorical features 𝑙𝑡
, 𝑐𝑡
, and 𝑝𝑡 are converted into
a numerical feature vector using one-hot encoding [20]. Additionally, we add an intercept term
(bias) by appending a constant value of 1, thus, the resulting context vector 𝑥𝑡 ∈ R
𝑑 has dimension
𝑑 = 𝑁tasks + 𝐾 + 𝑁bins + 1. The specific parameter values used in our experiments were determined
by non-exhaustive tuning described in § 7.1.5 and are intended to balance feature granularity with
dimensionality. The specific number of task types (𝑁tasks) is determined by the evaluation datasets
defined in § 7.1.2.
10 Anon.
5.3 Router Agent Trainer
The goal of GreenServ is to develop an adaptive router capable of selecting an efficient model for
a given input query. In the context of LLM inference, one critical aspect a router must handle is the
presence of unseen queries or out-of-domain distributions. To address this, we adopt a multi-armed
bandit (MAB)–based agent to learn a policy for selecting models from the feasible set 𝑚𝑡 ∈ 𝑀∗
𝑡
. For
the MAB algorithm, we construct a state and a corresponding reward structure to enable the agent
to learn the selection policy 𝜋𝑡
.
5.3.1 Multi-armed Bandit-based Router Agent. The core routing decision relies on multi-armed
bandit (MAB) algorithms. From the feasible set 𝑀∗
𝑡
, each model 𝑚 ∈ 𝑀 is treated as an arm. Based
on the extracted context vector 𝑥𝑡
, the MAB policy 𝜋 must select exactly one model 𝑚𝑡 to process
the query 𝑞𝑡
.
State Extractor. For each input query, the routing agent makes a decision and receives feedback
in the form of a state corresponding to that decision. GreenServ constructs the state using the following three parameters: 𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑚 (𝑞𝑡), 𝐸𝑚(𝑞𝑡), and 𝐿𝑚 (𝑞𝑡). This state captures both the characteristics
of the query and the performance of the model, in terms of accuracy and energy footprint.
We capture the accuracy 𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑚 (𝑞𝑡) and energy consumption in watt-hours 𝐸𝑚(𝑞𝑡) by interacting
with the inference engine and the monitoring agent. The context vector is computed before inference,
as described previously (see § 5.2).
One unique characteristic of LLM inference is that each task type produces a different number
of output tokens, which affects the latency 𝐿𝑚 (𝑞𝑡) observed in our experiments. To address this,
we use the predefined maximum number of output tokens allowed for the query’s task type
(MaxNewTokens) as a conservative estimate for the output length component.
Reward Manager. The MAB algorithm aims to maximize the expected scalarized reward defined
in Equation (5). To control this trade-off in practice, we parameterize the reward using a single
parameter 𝜆 ∈ [0, 1], where 𝛼 = 1 − 𝜆 and 𝛽 = 𝜆. It balances accuracy and energy consumption,
and can be interpreted as a system-wide goal or user preferences. 𝜆 = 0 prioritizes accuracy (pure
accuracy optimization), while 𝜆 = 1 prioritizes energy efficiency (pure energy optimization). The
performance of the MAB policy 𝜋 is evaluated by its cumulative regret over 𝑇 time steps and is
defined as the total difference between the maximum reward possible by the optimal (often referred
to as the oracle) and the actual reward obtained by 𝜋:
𝑅(𝑇 ) =
∑︁
𝑇
𝑡=1
[𝑟𝑡 (𝑚
∗
𝑡
, 𝑞𝑡
, 𝜆) − 𝑟𝑡 (𝑚𝑡
, 𝑞𝑡
, 𝜆)], (16)
where 𝑚𝑡 = 𝜋 (𝑥𝑡) is the model chosen by the policy and 𝑚∗
𝑡 = arg max𝑚∈𝑀∗
𝑡
𝑟𝑡 (𝑚, 𝑞𝑡
, 𝜆) is the
best possible choice at time step 𝑡 given the context and feasibility constraints.
This state and reward structure enables the implementation of MAB algorithms in practice. The
following subsection describes the practical implementation algorithm in detail.
5.3.2 Bandit Trainer. Algorithm 1 outlines the proposed algorithm for GreenServ context-aware
routing. It takes four inputs: the query stream {𝑞𝑡 }
𝑇
𝑡=1
of length 𝑇 , the available model pool M,
a MAB algorithm variant A, and the trade-off parameter 𝜆. On execution, it processes queries
sequentially by routing each to an appropriate model based on learned context-performance
relationships. The algorithm initializes MAB-specific parameters A𝑚 and b𝑚 for each model in the
pool (line 1) and sets up the context generation components, loading pre-trained task classifier
weights 𝑊 and initializing 𝐾 cluster centroids 𝝁 (line 2). For each query in the stream (line 3), the
algorithm extracts contextual features to obtain a 𝑑-dimensional vector x𝑡
(line 4). This vector
combines three key characteristics: task type, semantic cluster assignment, and text complexity
GreenServ: Energy-Efficient Context-Aware Dynamic Routing for Multi-Model LLM Inference 11
Algorithm 1 GreenServ: Context-Aware Routing for Multi-Model LLM Inference
Require: Query stream {𝑞𝑡 }
𝑇
𝑡=1
, model pool M, MAB algorithm A, parameters 𝜆
Ensure: Model selections {𝑚𝑡 }
𝑇
𝑡=1
1: Initialize MAB parameters {A𝑚, b𝑚} for each 𝑚 ∈ M
2: Initialize task classifier 𝑊 , cluster centroids 𝝁
3: for 𝑡 = 1 to 𝑇 do
4: x𝑡 ← GenerateContext(𝑞𝑡) {Task, cluster, complexity}
5: 𝑚𝑡 ← SelectModel(x𝑡
,M∗
𝑡
, A) {MAB routing}
6: response ← InferenceExecution(𝑚𝑡
, 𝑞𝑡)
7: accuracy, energy, latency ← Monitor(response) {Performance metrics}
8: 𝑟𝑡 ← (1 − 𝜆) · accuracy − 𝜆 · energy
9: UpdateMAB(A𝑚𝑡
, b𝑚𝑡
, x𝑡
, 𝑟𝑡)
10: end for
11: return {𝑚𝑡 }
𝑇
𝑡=1
score. The context vector x𝑡 serves as the input to the routing mechanism that follows. We then
perform model selection using the chosen MAB strategy (line 5). Here, SelectModel chooses 𝑚𝑡
based on the current context and learned parameters. The specific selection strategy depends on
algorithm A, explained in more detail in the upcoming paragraphs. After executing inference on the
selected model (line 6) and collecting performance measurements (line 7), the algorithm computes
the multi-objective reward 𝑟𝑡
(line 8). The parameter 𝜆 directly controls this trade-off by weighting
accuracy against energy consumption. Finally, the algorithm updates the MAB parameters for
the selected model (line 9) to incorporate the observed reward and context. This online learning
mechanism enables continuous policy refinement. Upon processing all 𝑇 queries, the algorithm
returns the complete sequence of model selections (line 11).
We implement and evaluate three multi-armed bandit algorithms for model routing: 𝜖-Greedy,
LinUCB, and Contextual Thompson Sampling (CTS). All three contextual algorithms share a
common foundation: they assume a linear relationship between context and reward,𝑟ˆ𝑚 (x𝑡) = 𝜽
𝑇
𝑚x𝑡
,
and maintain parameters A𝑚 ∈ R
𝑑×𝑑
and b𝑚 ∈ R
𝑑
for each model. They estimate parameters as
ˆ𝜽𝑚 = A
−1
𝑚 b𝑚 and update them identically: A𝑚𝑡 ← A𝑚𝑡 +x𝑡x
𝑇
𝑡
and b𝑚𝑡 ← b𝑚𝑡 +𝑟𝑡x𝑡 after observing
rewards. The algorithms differ fundamentally in their exploration mechanisms:
𝜖-Greedy algorithm [57] employs the simplest exploration strategy. With probability 𝜖, it selects
uniformly at random from M∗
𝑡
, independent of learned parameters. With probability 1 − 𝜖, it
exploits by selecting 𝑚𝑡 = arg max𝑚
ˆ𝜽
𝑇
𝑚x𝑡
. The contextual variant differs from its non-contextual
counterpart only in using the linear model rather than global average rewards. We implement
exponential decay 𝜖 = max(𝜖min, 𝜖 · 𝛿) to reduce exploration over time.
LinUCB [44] replaces random exploration with systematic uncertainty quantification. It augments the expected reward with an exploration bonus proportional to parameter uncertainty:
𝑚𝑡 = arg max
𝑚∈M∗
𝑡

ˆ𝜽
𝑇
𝑚x𝑡 + 𝛼
√︃
x
𝑇
𝑡 A
−1
𝑚 x𝑡

, (17)
where x
𝑇
𝑡 A
−1
𝑚 x𝑡 quantifies the reward estimate variance in context x𝑡
. The upper confidence
bound approach ensures exploration targets regions of high uncertainty over uniform randomness.
Contextual Thompson Sampling [19] adopts a Bayesian approach through posterior sampling.
The algorithm maintains posterior distributions 𝜽𝑚 ∼ N (ˆ𝜽𝑚, 𝜎2A
−1
𝑚 ) and samples parameters ˜𝜽𝑚
for each decision, selecting 𝑚𝑡 = arg max𝑚
˜𝜽
𝑇
𝑚x𝑡
. The uncertainty quantified by A
−1
𝑚 , used as an
12 Anon.
additive bonus in LinUCB, here determines the sampling variance. This creates implicit exploration
through the posterior variance, with uncertain models producing more variable parameter samples.
The three algorithms thus represent a progression in exploration sophistication from fixedprobability randomness (𝜖-greedy), through deterministic uncertainty bonuses (LinUCB), to probabilistic posterior sampling (CTS).
Complexity Analysis. Processing 𝑇 queries, GreenServ incurs a time complexity of 𝑂(𝑇 · (𝑙 +
|𝑀|𝑑
3
)), where 𝑙 is the input text length, |𝑀| the number of candidate models, and 𝑑 the feature
vector dimension. Space complexity depends on the bandit algorithm: non-contextual 𝜖-Greedy
requires 𝑂(|𝑀|) space, contextual variants use 𝑂(|𝑀|𝑑), and LinUCB/CTS require 𝑂(|𝑀|𝑑
2
). We
provide a detailed analysis of time and space complexity in Appendix B.
5.4 Online Deployment
During online deployment, the GreenServ router processes the incoming query 𝑞𝑡
. It begins by
computing the context vector 𝑥𝑡 for the given query and utilizes a trained Multi-Armed Bandit
(MAB) agent to select a suitable model. Specifically, if the chosen model 𝑚𝑡
is not already present
in memory, the router interacts with the inference engine to load the model into GPU memory.
Once the model is loaded, the inference engine generates a response for the query.
Note that multiple models can reside in memory simultaneously, and further optimizations may
be applied to reduce the cost of model loading. However, these optimizations are beyond the scope
of this work, as our primary focus is on model selection.
The system tracks energy consumption and latency from the beginning to the end of the inference
process. In addition, it logs key metadata, including the number of input tokens and generated
output tokens. Moreover, if a new model is added to the model pool, GreenServ can dynamically
learn and adapt to the newly introduced model through online interaction with the agent trainer.
6 Prototype Implementation
We implement the GreenServ prototype in Python 3.10. User requests are handled via an HTTP API
built with FastAPI [2], queued for inference over an asynchronous connection to Redis [12], and
stored in a PostgreSQL [10] database, which holds prompts, model identifiers, results, and metrics.
To isolate performance characteristics, we process each request independently (batch_size = 1)
and assume all model weights are locally available at runtime.
Datasets are loaded through the HuggingFace datasets library [4], with random sampling
conducted via Python’s random package. For feature extraction, we compute transformer-based
sentence embeddings using sentence-transformers [13] (specifically, the all-MiniLM-L6-v2
model). Basic classification is performed using Logistic Regression [20], and similar queries are
clustered online via K-Means [21], both implemented with scikit-learn [14]. Text complexity
is measured using textstat [15] and the Flesch Reading Ease score [30], which we discretize via
equal-width binning based on empirical score ranges.
We implement three multi-armed bandit strategies, 𝜖-Greedy [57], LinUCB [44], and CTS [19],
as custom Python classes, with internal operations performed on NumPy arrays [9]. LLMs are stored
locally and loaded as HuggingFace-compatible models using the transformers [16] library in
conjunction with PyTorch [11], using bfloat16 precision [41] to reduce GPU memory usage and
ensure efficient inference. All models undergo a single warm-up inference post-load to account for
lazy initialization that might otherwise skew latency measurements.
Energy consumption is measured using the zeus library [17], and inference latency is captured
via Python’s time module, excluding queueing time, feature extraction, routing, and model loading,
as models are pre-loaded and requests are processed sequentially. We evaluate system accuracy
using Exact Match (EM) for factual objectives and ROUGE [46] for summarization tasks, both
GreenServ: Energy-Efficient Context-Aware Dynamic Routing for Multi-Model LLM Inference 13
calculated with HuggingFace’s evaluate library [5]. The code and all associated artifacts are
provided via an anonymous GitHub repository for review purposes: GitHub repository3
.
7 Empirical Evaluation
This sections presents our empirical evaluation. In particular, we first detail our experimental setup
in Section 7.1 describing the testbed, the evaluation datasets and the LLMs we used in our model
pool, the evaluation metrics, how we tune the hyperparameters, and the baselines we used for
comparison. Further, we outline our experimental plan in § 7.2 and we present empirical results
in § 7.3. Finally, § 7.4 discusses the key findings, their implications, and the current limitations of
the study.
7.1 Experimental Setup
7.1.1 Testbed. We run our experiments on a server running Ubuntu 22.04.5 LTS and equipped
with 512 GB of RAM, an NVIDIA A100 GPU with 80 GB VRAM (CUDA 12.2), and an AMD EPYC
9354P processor with 32 cores. The GPU supports compute optimized bfloat16 acceleration [41].
7.1.2 Datasets. We selected five publicly available datasets encompassing a broad range of query
types, complexity levels, and domains. For each dataset, 500 instances were uniformly sampled
from the test set partition using a fixed random seed to ensure reproducibility. Specifically, we
utilize the MMLU [35] dataset for question answering, HellaSwag [60] for situation completion,
Winogrande [54] for commonsense reasoning, GSM8K [25] for mathematical reasoning, and CNN /
Daily Mail [36] for summarization. Evaluation for MMLU, HellaSwag, Winogrande, and GSM8K is
performed using the exact match metric, whereas the CNN / Daily Mail dataset is assessed with
the ROUGE metric [46].
7.1.3 Model Pool. We compose a pool of 16 publicly available LLMs, representing a range of
parameter scales and model families. Our model pool selection is guided by four criteria:
(1) Diversity in parameter counts, spanning from 0.5B to 34B, based on compatibility with our
computational resources;
(2) Inclusion of major model families provided by leading vendors namely, Phi [7], Gemma [3],
Mistral [8], Llama [6], and Qwen [1];
(3) Availability of model weights for local deployment;
(4) Recency of publication to ensure state-of-the-art performance.
The final model pool consists of five Qwen 2.5 models (0.5B, 1.5B, 3B, 7B, 14B), Mistral v0.3 7B,
four Gemma 3 models (1B, 4B, 12B, 27B), two Llama 3.1 models (1B and 8B) and Llama 3.2 3B, two
Phi models (4-mini 4B and 4 14B), as well as Yi 34B. Appendix A.1 provides a summary table of the
LLMs evaluated in our experiments, grouped by model family, along with their parameter counts
and Hugging Face identifiers (HF Handles).
7.1.4 Evaluation Metrics. We report mean normalized accuracy, total energy consumption (Wh),
model selection frequency, and cumulative and moving average regret values in our experimental
results. To estimate system overhead, we report mean latency (ms) and model selection time. Results
include 95% confidence intervals, where appropriate, to account for the inherent variance in LLM
outputs and the MAB learning processes.
The normalized accuracy is calculated through min-max normalization, which converts observed
accuracy values to a range of [0, 1]. This allows a consistent comparison across the different
evaluation metrics employed in the selected datasets.
3https://anonymous.4open.science/r/llm-inference-router-EBEA/README.md
14 Anon.
Normalized Accuracy =
𝐴𝑐𝑐 − 𝐴𝑐𝑐min
𝐴𝑐𝑐max − 𝐴𝑐𝑐min
(18)
where 𝐴min and 𝐴max are determined from baseline profiling runs of representative models in our
pool on the validation set for each specific task type. For establishing these bounds, we strategically
selected models that are likely to represent accuracy extremes, i.e., using smaller, older models
(e.g., Phi2-3B) to estimate minimal accuracy values and larger, newer models (e.g., Qwen2.5-32B) to
estimate maximum accuracy thresholds.
7.1.5 Hyperparameter Tuning. Prior to the main experiments, we conducted a round of preliminary
experiments to determine reasonable values for key hyperparameters. This involved adjusting
parameters for the different MAB algorithms, such as the initial exploration rate 𝜖0, and tuning the
feature extraction process, including the number of semantic clusters 𝐾cluster and the number of
text complexity bins 𝑁bins, to evaluate their impact on cumulative regret.
The final hyperparameters selected for the MAB algorithms, unless otherwise specified, are as
follows. For the 𝜖-Greedy algorithm, we set the initial exploration rate 𝜖0 to 1.0, used a multiplicative
decay factor 𝛿 of 0.98 per step, and imposed a minimum exploration probability 𝜖min of 0.01. For
LinUCB, the exploration parameter 𝛼 was set to 0.1 and the regularization parameter 𝜆reg to 0.05.
For CTS, the standard deviation assumption for reward noise 𝜎 was set to 0.01.
For feature extraction, we used 𝐾 = 3 semantic clusters and 𝑁bins = 3 text complexity bins, unless
specified differently. After one-hot encoding and the addition of an intercept term as described
in § 5, this yields a context vector dimension of 𝑑 = 12 for the contextual bandit algorithms.
7.1.6 Baselines. We compare GreenServ against the following four baselines.
(1) Random. Random selection serves as an estimate of how the whole model population
achieves accuracy and efficiency on average by randomly picking a model from the model
pool for each query.
(2) Largest (Yi-34B). In many deployments, one finds the tendency to assume that larger models
yield better results. This approach disregards resource demands and simulates real-world
scenarios that place model accuracy above all else.
(3) Smallest (Qwen2.5-0.5B). A baseline with the smallest model shows a scenario where energy
use and hardware requirements determine model choice. It indicates the accuracy loss
associated when minimizing resource consumption.
(4) Highest Accuracy (Gemma-3-27B): This approach selects the model that achieves the highest
possible average accuracy on benchmark tasks, without considering efficiency. It is derived
through exhaustive profiling of all models in the model pool, and serves as the upper bound
of achievable accuracy in a single-model setting.
7.2 Experimental Plan
We study the effectiveness and efficiency of GreenServ through five experiments.
7.2.1 GreenServ vs. Baselines. This experiment studies the effectiveness of GreenServ by comparing the different MAB strategies with the selected baselines presented in § 7.1.6. We investigate
learning behavior based on cumulative and moving-average regret, and evaluate the resulting
regret, mean normalized accuracy, and total energy consumption for each algorithm.
7.2.2 Trade-off Analysis (𝜆 Sweep). This experiment studies how GreenServ handles the trade-offs
at different configurations by varying the 𝜆 parameter. We vary the 𝜆 parameter from 0 (accuracy
only) to 1 (efficiency only) in increments of 0.1. For each value, we executed 20 runs for each of the
MAB algorithms with all contextual features activated.
GreenServ: Energy-Efficient Context-Aware Dynamic Routing for Multi-Model LLM Inference 15
7.2.3 Impact of Contextual Features. This experiment studies the impact of different contextual
features on routing decisions, as not all features are expected to contribute equally to potential
accuracy and efficiency gains. We run experiments with different feature configurations. In particular, context-free routing uses no features and the router learns only their global average reward.
Single-feature routing only has information about one of the three context dimensions (i.e., task
type, semantic cluster, text complexity) during the whole experiment run. Full-context routing
leverages all features by using all derived query characteristics. We executed 50 runs for each
configuration by employing the 𝜖-Greedy algorithm.
7.2.4 Adaptability: Model Addition. This experiment examines how GreenServ effectively adapts
to changes in the model pool to simulate real-world scenarios of regular model releases. We introduce
a new model (Gemma-3-12b), which showed high reward scores in a previous experiment after
1000 queries, and investigate if and how extensively the system incorporates it. In this experiment,
we use the CTS algorithm with full features and 𝜆 = 0.2 to favor the new high-accuracy model.
7.2.5 Overhead Analysis. This experiment evaluates the overhead the routing mechanism itself
introduces to determine whether the benefits outweigh the costs. In particular, we account for the
average latency introduced by each step involved in the feature extraction and the routing decision
process per query.
For all the experiments, we use our evaluation dataset consisting of 500 samples from each of
the five benchmarks (i.e., total sequence length of 𝑇 = 2, 500 queries per experiment run). Unless
otherwise specified, each experiment runs for the full sequence length of 𝑇 = 2, 500.
7.3 Results
-Greedy (NC)
-Greedy (C)
LinUCB (C)
Thompson Sampling (C)
Random
Largest
Smallest
Accuracy
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Mean Normalized Accuracy
Mean Normalized Accuracy
Total Energy (Wh)
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
Total Energy Consumption (Wh)
(a)
250 500 750
Total Energy Consumption (Wh)
0.30
0.35
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.70
Mean Normalized Accuracy
Pareto Front
Individual Models
Random
Largest
Smallest
Accuracy
LinUCB (C)
Thompson Sampling (C)
-Greedy (C)
-Greedy (NC)
(b)
Fig. 2. Comparison of mean normalized accuracy (higher is better) and total energy consumption. Contextual
MAB algorithms use all available features. Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals. The static Pareto
frontier in Figure 2b is shown for reference.
7.3.1 GreenServ vs. Baselines. Figure 2a shows the mean normalized accuracy and energy consumption achieved by GreenServ configured with different MAB algorithms (𝜆 = 0.4) and the
baselines. The data are the results of 50 experiment runs and includes 95% confidence intervals. The
contextual MAB algorithms consistently achieve higher accuracy at lower energy consumption
when compared to baselines. In particular, contextual variants achieve a maximum accuracy of
≈ 0.65 with significantly lower energy consumption (≈ 165 Wh). More specifically, they outperform the non-contextual 𝜖-Greedy by reaching higher accuracy (0.64-0.65 vs. 0.59), but reducing
16 Anon.
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500
Query Index (Time Step)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Cumulative Regret
Cumulative Regret Over Time
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500
Query Index (Time Step)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Moving Average Regret (Window=50)
Moving Average Regret Over Time
Random Largest Smallest Accuracy LinUCB (C) -Greedy (NC) Thompson Sampling (C) -Greedy (C)
Fig. 3. The left plot shows the cumulative regret over time for different MAB algorithms using the Full
Features context. Shaded areas represent 95% confidence intervals. The right plot shows the moving average
(window=50) regret over time for different MAB algorithms using the Full Features context, smoothing
short-term fluctuations.
energy consumption by 29-38%. Compared to the static baselines, improvements become even more
prevalent with the contextual strategies reducing energy consumption substantially compared
to the random (25-37%), largest (59-66%), and accuracy ( 75-79%) baselines, while simultaneously
achieving superior accuracy to the random (≈ 0.51), largest (≈ 0.39), and smallest (≈ 0.33) baselines.
The confidence intervals for both accuracy and energy consumption largely overlap across the
three contextual MAB algorithms, which suggests that there exists no significant difference in
achieved accuracy or energy consumption between the proposed contextual MAB algorithms.
Similarly, Figure 2b illustrates the trade-off of the same metrics but for a single run. The static
Pareto front (red dashed line) is shown for reference. Predominantly, the three contextual MAB
algorithms (i.e., Contextual 𝜖-Greedy, LinUCB, and Contextual Thompson Sampling) position
themselves closely together in the more optimal top-left region. The contextual strategies surpass
the static Pareto front, which demonstrates that using context for dynamic routing can allow
superior accuracy-efficiency balance by effectively combining the usage of multiple models.
Figure 3 (left) illustrates the cumulative regret of each MAB algorithm over the query sequence.
The plot confirms the expected linear regret increase of the static baselines and the random selection.
The non-contextual 𝜖-Greedy implementation demonstrates learning capacity. However, its regret
grows visibly faster than the contextual variants. Contextual strategies show more effective learning,
indicated by their flatter regret curves visually beginning to diverge after the initial 200-300 queries.
This, on the other hand, shows the impact of early policy optimization on overall regret. Overall,
Contextual 𝜖-Greedy yields the lowest mean regret (≈ 398), around 15% reduction compared to
its non-contextual version (≈ 466). LinUCB (≈ 412) and Contextual Thompson Sampling (≈ 400)
achieve similar regret reductions.
Figure 3 (right) visualizes the moving average regret for a window size of 50 to investigate learning
stability and convergence patterns. An initial cold start period is evident for the MAB algorithms.
We can observe an high and erratic average regret during the first ≈ 50 steps of exploration.
Following this phase, both non-contextual and contextual algorithms stabilize relatively quickly,
with the non-contextual 𝜖-Greedy stabilizing at a higher average regret level (≈ 0.18 vs. ≈ 0.16). In
GreenServ: Energy-Efficient Context-Aware Dynamic Routing for Multi-Model LLM Inference 17
contrast, the contextual algorithms converge slower when compared to the non-contextual ones.
The frequently crossing lines of the contextual strategies visible in Figure 3 (right) suggest that
learned policies may be similar yet not identical. We report in Appendix A.2 additional results that
illustrate these nuances in model selection patterns across the MAB algorithms.
7.3.2 Trade-off Analysis (𝜆 Sweep). Figure 4 presents the distribution of mean normalized accuracy
and total energy consumption across 20 runs for each algorithm as 𝜆 changes in between 0 and 1.
Both accuracy and energy consumption decrease as 𝜆 increases, which demonstrates the system’s
ability to prioritize either objective when instructed. The contextual MAB algorithms show similar
trends, maintaining slightly higher accuracy, lower energy consumption and greater robustness
compared to the non-contextual 𝜖-Greedy across most 𝜆 values.
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
Lambda ( )
0.35
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.70
Mean Normalized Accuracy
Normalized Accuracy Distribution
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
Lambda ( )
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Total Energy Consumption (Wh)
Total Energy Consumption Distribution
-Greedy (NC) -Greedy (C) LinUCB (C) Thompson Sampling (C)
Fig. 4. Distribution of Mean Normalized Accuracy (left) and Total Energy Consumption (right) for different
MAB strategies across 𝜆 values.
Figure 5 provides another perspective on the trade-off by showing our strategy aggregates on
accuracy-energy for different 𝜆 values (in increments of 0.2 for clarity). Each point represents
the average accuracy-energy outcome of an algorithm at a specific 𝜆 value. As 𝜆 increases, MAB
results follow the Pareto front from upper-right to lower-left. Remarkably, contextual strategies
consistently operate close to or beyond the static Pareto front (red dashed line).
200 400 600
0.30
0.35
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.70
Mean Normalized Accuracy
 = 0.00
200 400 600
 = 0.20
200 400 600
 = 0.40
200 400 600
 = 0.60
200 400 600
 = 0.80
200 400 600
 = 1.00
Total Energy Consumption (Wh)
Individual Model
Pareto Front
Random
Largest
Smallest
Accuracy
Greedy (NC)
Greedy (C)
LinUCB (C)
Thompson Sampling (C)
Fig. 5. Mean Normalized Accuracy vs. Total Energy Consumption (Wh) for different strategies at varying 𝜆
values (0.0 to 1.0, increments of 0.2). The static Pareto front is shown for reference.
18 Anon.
7.3.3 Impact of Contextual Features. Figure 6 presents the final cumulative regret distribution
across 50 independent runs for each feature configuration: None (context-free baseline), Task,
Cluster, Complexity, Task + Cluster, Task + Complexity, Cluster + Complexity, and Full (all features).
On average, Cluster reduces regret (-17) while Complexity increases it slightly (+7) compared to
the implementation without features. However, the most substantial reduction in regret appears
to be linked to the inclusion of the Task feature, dropping median cumulative regret to ≈ 400.
This identifies the task type as the single most informative component of context for guiding
model selection in our setup. Combinations involving the Task feature (Task + Cluster, Task +
Complexity) retain or slightly improve this level of regret reduction. However, including all features
appears to raise regret levels notably. This might be attributed to the increased dimensionality
which potentially slows convergence for the MABs during learning or introduce noise from less
interactions informative feature compared to the strong signal provided by the task type alone.
We report in Appendix A.3 additional results that present how context influences model selection
behavior by showing the selection frequency of each model.
Fig. 6. Distribution of final cumulative regret across multiple runs (n=50) for different contextual feature
configurations at 𝜆 = 0.4.
7.3.4 Adaptability: Model Addition. Figure 7 shows the mean selection frequency of each model
over the course of the experiment with a window size of 25. Before the adaptation point (black
line), the newly added model (Gemma-3-12b) correctly shows zero selection frequency as it was not
yet part of the pool. Immediately after its introduction, the algorithm begins to explore it, and its
selection frequency rapidly increases. After around 100 queries, the selection frequency stabilizes
at around 20%-25%. This shift in selection frequency visibly comes at the cost of previously frequently selected models (LLama-3.1-8b,Gemma-3-27b, Gemma-3-1b), which indicates the successful
adaptation of the system to the pool of models by integrating the model into its routing strategy.
7.3.5 Overhead Analysis. The average overhead introduced by the system for each query consists of
several distinct components. Task type classification requires 3.04 ms, semantic cluster identification
takes 3.37 ms, and text complexity calculation adds 0.15 ms. Among the MAB algorithms strategies,
the 𝜖-Greedy is the fastest at just 0.02 ms, followed by LinUCB at 0.86 ms and CTS at 1.21 ms.
Summing these, the total pre-inference overhead per query is approximately 6.68–7.77 ms when
processed sequentially.
When compared to the actual inference times of the evaluated models, this overhead is minor.
For example, median inference latencies range from 36.1 ms for Llama-3.2-1B to 199.7 ms for
GreenServ: Energy-Efficient Context-Aware Dynamic Routing for Multi-Model LLM Inference 19
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
2000
2250
Query Epoch (Window Size = 25)
llama-3.2-1b
gemma-3-12b
phi-4-mini-4b
llama-3.2-3b
qwen2.5-3b
qwen2.5-7b
mistral-7b
qwen2.5-14b
qwen2.5-1.5b
llama-3.1-8b
gemma-3-4b
qwen2.5-0.5b
phi-4-14b
gemma-3-27b
gemma-3-1b
yi-34b
Models
Adaptation Point
Model Selection Heatmap
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Selection Frequency
Fig. 7. Mean selection frequency over time using Contextual Thompson Sampling (𝜆 = 0.2) for a single run.
Gemma-3-12b is added at Query Step 1000 (black line).
Gemma-3-27B, with the relative overhead (assuming a 7.8 ms fixed cost) ranging from 21.6% for
the fastest model down to just 3.9% for the slowest. We report in Appendix A.4 the detailed results
for each of the models.
In summary, results indicate that the routing and feature extraction pipeline does not constitute
a significant bottleneck relative to the overall inference time of state-of-the-art large language
models. In fact, the measured overhead is negligible for batch processing scenarios or applications
where latency is not critical. However, in latency-sensitive deployments, further optimization of
the feature extraction and routing steps may be warranted to minimize their impact.
7.3.6 External Benchmark Validation. We further validated our GreenServ using RouterBench [37]
and evaluated on ≈ 36k queries spanning 9 tasks. Table 1 presents the results of three contextual
MAB algorithms across three key metrics. The results demonstrate that contextual 𝜖-Greedy
achieves the highest Average Improvement in Quality (AIQ) of 0.637. AIQ is RouterBench’s primary
metric for capturing the cost-performance trade-off frontier. This indicates superior performance
across RouterBench’s willingness-to-pay (WTP) parameter, which corresponds to GreenServ’s
trade-off parameter 𝜆. LinUCB attains the best peak and average accuracy, however, its lower AIQ
suggests subpar optimization results at certain parts of the WTP range.
Table 1. Performance of contextual routing algorithms on RouterBench. AIQ is averaged across all 9 tasks.
Algorithm AIQ Peak Acc. Avg. Acc.
𝜖-Greedy 0.637 75.4% 69.2%
Thompson Sampling 0.624 69.5% 66.3%
LinUCB 0.607 75.7% 71.7%
Summary. Dynamic routing using contextual bandits consistently outperformed static and random baselines. At the default trade-off (𝜆 = 0.4), GreenServ exceeded boundaries set by the Pareto
front, presenting accuracy-energy operating points unreachable by single-model deployments in
20 Anon.
our experiments. Compared to the Random, we achieved 22% accuracy gain while reducing energy
consumption by 31%. Compared to the Smallest baseline, we improved accuracy by 90–100% with a
400% increase in energy use. In exchange for an accuracy degradation of 10–12%, energy consumption dropped by 75% on average. Among algorithms, contextual 𝜖-Greedy, Contextual Thompson
Sampling, and LinUCB converged to similar regret values, suggesting that feature engineering,
model pool selection, and reward function design may matter more than the specific contextual
bandit algorithm choice in this setup.
7.4 Discussion
Our study confirms that the accuracy–efficiency trade-off in LLM inference is significantly influenced by both inherent model characteristics (e.g., parameter count, architecture, training) and
query-specific properties. As shown in the experimental results (see § 7.3), models demonstrate
varying levels of accuracy and resource consumption depending on the task type, domain, and
complexity of the input query. GreenServ addresses these trade-offs by inherently incorporating
contextual information (i.e., query features) and adapting routing decisions based on the varying
accuracy–efficiency performance across diverse queries and model repositories.
However, in its current setting, GreenServ has the following limitations. First, the implemented
MAB algorithms implicitly assume stationary reward distributions. This means that, once fitted,
they adapt slowly to potential drifts in model performance or query characteristics over longer
periods. To address this, we could extend the calibration of the MAB agent and query context
vectors at periodic intervals. Second, the proposed MAB-based routing system, once trained, is
typically applied to specific hardware settings or platforms. To generalize our proposed solution, we
would require additional latency profiles for various GPU architectures. Third, while we evaluated
the impact of contextual characteristics, the sensitivity to specific features engineering choices,
such as the number of clusters 𝐾 or the number of complexity bins 𝑁, could be further explored.
Finally, the empirical results obtained in this study are based on controlled environments for
LLM deployments. In contrast, operational conditions should account for factors such as request
concurrency and batch processing. We should also consider including queuing delays and runtime
model switching. However, we assume that real-world deployments load multiple models into
run-time memory to avoid bootstrap time.
8 Conclusions
We presented GreenServ, a dynamic LLM inference routing framework that employs multi-armed
bandits (MABs) to balance accuracy and energy consumption. GreenServ extracts a lightweight
and multi-feature query context and leverages online MAB algorithms that adapt routing policies
using partial feedback, thereby eliminating the need for costly offline calibration. By formalizing
routing as a contextual multi-objective optimization problem and leveraging direct GPU energy
measurements, we address the limitations of prior approaches that rely on proxy cost metrics.
Our empirical evaluation demonstrates superior performance over static baselines, achieving a
22% increase in accuracy and a 31% reduction in energy consumption under optimal configurations.
The results also validate the framework’s ability to adapt policies to new models at runtime without
requiring expensive offline recalibration.
In future work, we plan to extend the framework to support low-level hardware knob configurations to further reduce the energy cost of LLM inference. Additionally, we intend to scale our
experiments to include larger models and multi-node cluster deployments.
GreenServ: Energy-Efficient Context-Aware Dynamic Routing for Multi-Model LLM Inference 21
References
[1] Alibaba cloud qwen models. https://qwenlm.github.io/.
[2] Fastapi. https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/.
[3] Google gemma models. https://ai.google.dev/gemma.
[4] Huggingface. https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets/index.
[5] Huggingface evaluate documentation. https://huggingface.co/docs/evaluate.
[6] Meta llama models. https://www.llama.com/models/llama-3/.
[7] Microsoft phi models. https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/products/ai-studio/phi.
[8] Mistral ai models. https://mistral.ai/.
[9] Numpy. https://numpy.org/.
[10] Postgresql. https://www.postgresql.org.
[11] Pytorch. https://pytorch.org/.
[12] Redis. https://redis.io/.
[13] Sbert. https://www.sbert.net/.
[14] scikit-learn. https://scikit-learn.org/stable/.
[15] textstat. https://pypi.org/project/textstat/.
[16] Transformers documentation. https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/index.
[17] Zeus: Energy and power profiling for ml. https://github.com/ml-energy/zeus.
[18] Achiam, J., Adler, S., Agarwal, S., Ahmad, L., Akkaya, I., Aleman, F. L., Almeida, D., Altenschmidt, J., Altman,
S., Anadkat, S., et al. GPT-4 Technical Report. arXiv:2303.08774 (2023).
[19] Agrawal, S., and Goyal, N. Thompson Sampling for Contextual Bandits with Linear Payoffs. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) (2013), PMLR, pp. 127–135.
[20] Bishop, C. M., and Nasrabadi, N. M. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. Springer, 2006.
[21] Bottou, L., and Bengio, Y. Convergence Properties of the K-Means Algorithms. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems (NeurIPS) 7 (1994), 585–592.
[22] Chang, Y., Wang, X., Wang, J., Wu, Y., Yang, L., Zhu, K., Chen, H., Yi, X., Wang, C., Wang, Y., et al. A Survey on
Evaluation of Large Language Models. ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology 15, 3 (2024), 1–45.
[23] Chen, L., Zaharia, M., and Zou, J. FrugalGPT: How to Use Large Language Models While Reducing Cost and
Improving Performance. arXiv:2305.05176 (2023).
[24] Chen, S., Jiang, W., Lin, B., Kwok, J., and Zhang, Y. RouterDC: Query-Based Router by Dual Contrastive Learning
for Assembling Large Language Models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) 37 (2024),
66305–66328.
[25] Cobbe, K., Kosaraju, V., Bavarian, M., Chen, M., Jun, H., Kaiser, L., Plappert, M., Tworek, J., Hilton, J., Nakano,
R., Hesse, C., and Schulman, J. Training Verifiers to Solve Math Word Problems. arXiv:2110.14168 (2021).
[26] Company, M. . The State of AI: How Organizations Are Rewiring to Capture Value. Industry Report, 2025. Available
at: https://www.mckinsey.com/capabilities/quantumblack/our-insights/the-state-of-ai Accessed: 2025-05-04.
[27] Ding, D., Mallick, A., Wang, C., Sim, R., Mukherjee, S., Rühle, V., Lakshmanan, L. V., and Awadallah, A. H.
Hybrid LLM: Cost-Efficient and Quality-Aware Query Routing. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
Learning Representations (ICLR) (2024).
[28] Dohan, D., Xu, W., Lewkowycz, A., Austin, J., Bieber, D., Lopes, R. G., Wu, Y., Michalewski, H., Saurous, R. A.,
Sohl-dickstein, J., Murphy, K., and Sutton, C. Language model cascades, 2022.
[29] Feng, T., Shen, Y., and You, J. GraphRouter: A Graph-Based Router for LLM Selections. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) (2025).
[30] Flesch, R. A New Readability Yardstick. Journal of Applied Psychology 32, 3 (1948), 221.
[31] Frantar, E., Ashkboos, S., Hoefler, T., and Alistarh, D. OPTQ: Accurate Quantization for Generative Pre-Trained
Transformers. In Proceedings of International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) (2023).
[32] Fu, X.-Y., Laskar, M. T. R., Khasanova, E., Chen, C., and Tn, S. Tiny titans: Can smaller large language models
punch above their weight in the real world for meeting summarization? In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 6:
Industry Track) (Mexico City, Mexico, 2024), Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 387–394.
[33] Guha, N., Chen, M., Chow, T., Khare, I., and Re, C. Smoothie: Label Free Language Model Routing. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) (2024), vol. 37, pp. 127645–127672.
[34] Hari, S. N., and Thomson, M. Tryage: Real-time, intelligent Routing of User Prompts to Large Language Models.
arXiv:2308.11601 (2023).
[35] Hendrycks, D., Burns, C., Basart, S., Zou, A., Mazeika, M., Song, D., and Steinhardt, J. Measuring Massive
Multitask Language Understanding. In Proceedings of International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR)
(2021).
22 Anon.
[36] Hermann, K. M., Kocisky, T., Grefenstette, E., Espeholt, L., Kay, W., Suleyman, M., and Blunsom, P. Teaching
Machines to Read and Comprehend. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) (2015), vol. 28,
pp. 1693–1701.
[37] Hu, Q. J., Bieker, J., Li, X., Jiang, N., Keigwin, B., Ranganath, G., Keutzer, K., and Upadhyay, S. K. RouterBench: A
Benchmark for Multi-LLM Routing System. In Agentic Markets Workshop at ICML (2024).
[38] International Energy Agency. Electricity 2024: Analysis and forecast to 2026. https://iea.blob.core.windows.net/
assets/18f3ed24-4b26-4c83-a3d2-8a1be51c8cc8/Electricity2024-Analysisandforecastto2026.pdf, 2024.
[39] International Energy Agency. Energy and AI, 2025. Available at: https://www.iea.org/reports/energy-and-ai
Accessed: 2025-05-04.
[40] Jitkrittum, W., Narasimhan, H., Rawat, A. S., Juneja, J., Wang, Z., Lee, C.-Y., Shenoy, P., Panigrahy, R., Menon,
A. K., and Kumar, S. Universal LLM Routing with Correctness-Based Representation. In First Workshop on Scalable
Optimization for Efficient and Adaptive Foundation Models (2025).
[41] Kalamkar, D., Mudigere, D., Mellempudi, N., Das, D., Banerjee, K., Avancha, S., Vooturi, D. T., Jammalamadaka,
N., Huang, J., Yuen, H., et al. A Study of BFLOAT16 for Deep Learning Training. arXiv:1905.12322 (2019).
[42] Langford, J., and Zhang, T. The epoch-greedy algorithm for multi-armed bandits with side information. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems 20, Proceedings of the Twenty-First Annual Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, December 3-6, 2007 (2007), J. C. Platt, D. Koller, Y. Singer, and
S. T. Roweis, Eds., Curran Associates, Inc., pp. 817–824.
[43] Lattimore, T., and Szepesvári, C. Bandit algorithms. Cambridge University Press, 2020.
[44] Li, L., Chu, W., Langford, J., and Schapire, R. E. A Contextual-Bandit Approach to Personalized News Article
Recommendation. In Proceedings of the International World Wide Web Conference (WWW) (2010), pp. 661–670.
[45] Li, Y. LLM Bandit: Cost-Efficient LLM Generation via Preference-Conditioned Dynamic Routing. arXiv:2502.02743
(2025).
[46] Lin, C.-Y. ROUGE: A Package for Automatic Evaluation of Summaries. In Text summarization branches out (2004),
pp. 74–81.
[47] Marler, R., and Arora, J. Survey of Multi-Objective Optimization Methods for Engineering. Structural and
Multidisciplinary Optimization 26, 6 (2004), 369–395.
[48] Nah, F. F.-H. A Study on Tolerable Waiting Time: How Long Are Web Users Willing to Wait? Behaviour & Information
Technology 23, 3 (2004), 153–163.
[49] Ong, I., Almahairi, A., Wu, V., Chiang, W.-L., Wu, T., Gonzalez, J. E., Kadous, M. W., and Stoica, I. RouteLLM:
Learning to Route LLMs from Preference Data. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR) (2025).
[50] Papineni, K., Roukos, S., Ward, T., and Zhu, W.-J. BLEU: A Method for Automatic Evaluation of Machine Translation.
In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) (2002), pp. 311–318.
[51] Powers, D. Evaluation: From Precision, Recall and F-Measure to ROC, Informedness, Markedness & Correlation.
Journal of Machine Learning Technologies 2, 1 (2011), 37–63.
[52] Rajpurkar, P., Zhang, J., Lopyrev, K., and Liang, P. SQuAD: 100,000+ Questions for Machine Comprehension of
Text. In Proceedings of EMNLP (2016), pp. 2383–2392.
[53] Reimers, N., and Gurevych, I. Sentence-BERT: Sentence Embeddings Using Siamese BERT-Networks. In Proceedings
of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the International Joint Conference on Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) (Hong Kong, China, 2019), K. Inui, J. Jiang, V. Ng, and X. Wan, Eds., Association
for Computational Linguistics, pp. 3982–3992.
[54] Sakaguchi, K., Bras, R. L., Bhagavatula, C., and Choi, Y. WinoGrande: An Adversarial Winograd Schema Challenge
at Scale. Communications of the ACM 64, 9 (2021), 99–106.
[55] Srivastava, A., Rastogi, A., Rao, A., Shoeb, A. A. M., Abid, A., Fisch, A., Brown, A. R., Santoro, A., Gupta, A.,
Garriga-Alonso, A., et al. Beyond the imitation game: Quantifying and extrapolating the capabilities of language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.04615 (2022).
[56] Stripelis, D., Xu, Z., Hu, Z., Shah, A. D., Jin, H., Yao, Y., Zhang, J., Zhang, T., Avestimehr, S., and He, C. TensorOpera
Router: A Multi-Model Router for Efficient LLM Inference. In Proceedings of EMNLP, Industry Track (Miami, Florida,
US, 2024), F. Dernoncourt, D. Preoţiuc-Pietro, and A. Shimorina, Eds., Association for Computational Linguistics,
pp. 452–462.
[57] Sutton, R. S., Barto, A. G., et al. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction, vol. 1. MIT Press Cambridge, 1998.
[58] Wang, X., Liu, Y., Cheng, W., Zhao, X., Chen, Z., Yu, W., Fu, Y., and Chen, H. MixLLM: Dynamic Routing in Mixed
Large Language Models. In Proceedings of NAACL-HLT (2025), pp. 10912–10922.
[59] Wang, Y., Chen, K., Tan, H., and Guo, K. Tabi: An Efficient Multi-Level Inference System for Large Language Models.
In Proceedings of the Eighteenth European Conference on Computer Systems (Rome Italy, 2023), ACM, pp. 233–248.
GreenServ: Energy-Efficient Context-Aware Dynamic Routing for Multi-Model LLM Inference 23
[60] Zellers, R., Holtzman, A., Bisk, Y., Farhadi, A., and Choi, Y. Hellaswag: Can a machine really finish your sentence?
arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.07830 (2019).
[61] Zeng, L., Benatallah, B., Ngu, A. H., Dumas, M., Kalagnanam, J., and Chang, H. QoS-Aware Middleware for Web
Services Composition. IEEE Transactions on software engineering 30, 5 (2004), 311–327.
[62] Zhao, Z., Jin, S., and Mao, Z. M. Eagle: Efficient training-free router for multi-llm inference, 2024.
[63] Zhuang, R., Wu, T., Wen, Z., Li, A., Jiao, J., and Ramchandran, K. EmbedLLM: Learning Compact Representations
of Large Language Models. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) (2025).
24 Anon.
A Empirical Evaluation
A.1 Model Pool
Table 2. Model Pool
Family Version # Parameters (B) HF Handle
Qwen
2.5 0.5 Qwen/Qwen2.5-0.5B-Instruct
2.5 1.5 Qwen/Qwen2.5-1.5B-Instruct
2.5 3 Qwen/Qwen2.5-3B-Instruct
2.5 7 Qwen/Qwen2.5-7B
2.5 14 Qwen/Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct
Mistral v0.3 7 mistralai/Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3
Gemma
3 1 google/gemma-3-1b-it
3 4 google/gemma-3-4b-it
3 12 google/gemma-3-12b-it
3 27 google/gemma-3-27b-it
Llama
3.1 1 meta-llama/Llama-3.1-1B-Instruct
3.2 3 meta-llama/Llama-3.2-3B-Instruct
3.1 8 meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct
Phi 4-mini 4 microsoft/Phi-4-mini-instruct
4 14 microsoft/Phi-4-14B
Yi - 34 01-ai/Yi-34B
Table 2 lists the LLMs used in the experiments, grouped by model family, along with their
parameter counts and Hugging Face identifiers (HF Handles).
A.2 Model Selection Patterns
Figure 8 illustrates model selection patterns across the MAB algorithms. Some models (i.e., Llama3.1-8B, Phi-4-Mini-4B) demonstrate high selection frequency for multiple algorithms. The contextual
algorithms (C) show more distributed selection patterns compared to the non-contextual (NC)
variant. This indicates the ability to learn more fine-grained distinctions in model performance,
which is particularly evident in the middle-tier models, that are consistent with the high density of
options in this area. Collectively, such actions suggest the algorithms are identifying niches where
certain models excel despite them not being optimal for all queries.
A.3 Contextual Features
Figure 9 further presents how context influences model selection behavior by showing the selection
frequency of each model. The top heatmap displays patterns for the first half of the experiment
(1-1250), while the bottom shows model selections for the second half (T=1251 to T=2500). Both are
averaged over the last ten runs of the experiment. During the half, we observe more distributed
selections across models as the algorithm actively explores the space. As more features are added
to the configuration, exploration appears to increase further distributing loads between models.
In contrast, the second half shows more concentrated selection patterns as policies stabilize. The
baseline without features consistently favors Qwen2.5-7B (≈ 0.6 frequency in the second half), while
contextual approaches develop more sophisticated strategies. When the task feature is included, the
Contextual MAB appears to prefer Llama-3.2-1B (≈ 0.17) and Phi-4-mini-4B (≈ 0.19) among others.
GreenServ: Energy-Efficient Context-Aware Dynamic Routing for Multi-Model LLM Inference 25
Fig. 8. Sequence of models chosen by the MAB algorithms during a single run (𝜆 = 0.4).
The Full Features configuration demonstrates the most spread-out policies as it tries to match query
requirements precisely.
A.4 Overhead Analysis
Table 3. Average Overhead per Component
Component Avg. Time per Query (ms)
Task Type Classification 3.04
Semantic Cluster Identification 3.37
Text Complexity Calculation 0.15
𝜖-Greedy Routing Decision 0.02
LinUCB Routing Decision 0.86
Contextual Thompson Sampling Routing Decision 1.21
Total Pre-Inference Overhead 6.68-7.77
Table 3 lists the average elapsed time (ms) for each step involved in the feature extraction and
routing decision process for a single query. Combined, the total average overhead per query added
by our system is approximately 6.68-7.77 ms when processed sequentially. This overhead should be
evaluated in perspective to the actual inference times, which varied significantly across our model
pool, as detailed in Table 4.
26 Anon.
Fig. 9. The heatmaps show the selection frequency of each model for different feature configurations across
runs (n=10). The top heatmap shows selections during the first half of the experiments (1-1250), while
the bottom shows the second half (1251-2500). Darker blue indicates higher selection frequency. Without
contextual features (None), selections concentrate on fewer models, while adding features leads to more
diverse selection patterns that become increasingly focused as the algorithm learns.
B Complexity Analysis
The computational complexity of GreenServ stems mainly from feature extraction and model
selection during routing. We analyze how the system scales with key parameters: the number of
queries 𝑇 , model pool size |𝑀|, context vector dimension 𝑑, and average query length 𝑙.
B.1 Time Complexity
For each incoming query, we perform feature extraction followed by routing. In the demonstrated
implementation, feature extraction involves computing two transformer embeddings using allMiniLM-L6-v2, which has a fixed maximum sequence length of 256 tokens. Any input exceeding
this limit is truncated, bounding the self-attention computation to 𝑂(2562
) = 𝑂(1) time regardless
of query length. The Flesch Reading Ease calculation adds an 𝑂(𝑙) pass through the full text.
Since the remaining operations (task classification, cluster assignment and one-hot encoding)
GreenServ: Energy-Efficient Context-Aware Dynamic Routing for Multi-Model LLM Inference 27
Table 4. Model Inference Latency Statistics
Model Min P25 Median Average P75 Max Overhead (%)
Llama-3.2-1B 19.8 34.6 36.1 570.8 1,196.7 2,401.6 21.6
Qwen2.5-0.5B 14.0 43.2 44.3 686.1 1,402.9 3,350.8 17.6
Qwen2.5-1.5B 20.0 48.9 50.6 976.1 1,926.0 3,907.8 15.4
Llama-3.2-3B 16.4 47.1 51.6 977.9 1,955.6 3,936.4 15.1
Phi-4-mini-4B 18.3 47.6 52.7 982.6 1,605.1 4,557.5 14.8
Qwen2.5-3B 40.2 50.4 53.8 1,351.4 2,078.4 4,995.9 14.5
Qwen2.5-7B 38.4 48.0 56.4 1,880.2 3,525.7 10,523.9 13.8
Llama-3.1-8B 42.1 51.5 60.8 1,366.5 2,491.6 4,603.7 12.8
Mistral-7B 42.1 51.4 60.9 1,103.2 2,345.4 4,324.3 12.8
Gemma-3-1B 52.4 57.3 68.2 2,848.3 5,026.1 12,666.0 11.4
Phi-4-14B 33.9 62.7 76.8 1,553.8 2,420.8 6,790.7 10.2
Gemma-3-4B 72.6 75.8 81.1 2,225.8 3,595.8 9,039.5 9.6
Gemma-3-12B 48.2 61.3 83.0 3,104.4 5,771.0 14,296.9 9.4
Qwen2.5-14B 66.6 70.7 83.8 1,786.2 2,208.0 7,387.5 9.3
Yi-34B 71.5 113.8 163.4 2,195.5 3,924.0 14,571.3 4.8
Gemma-3-27B 158.4 167.1 199.7 5,088.3 6,639.8 37,972.6 3.9
require constant time, feature extraction totals 𝑂(𝑙) per query, though in practice the constant-time
transformer operations dominate.
The routing complexity depends on the chosen algorithm. All variants first check feasibility
constraints for each model in 𝑂(|𝑀|) time. Non-contextual 𝜖-Greedy then requires at most 𝑂(|𝑀|)
comparisons to find the best model. Contextual algorithms cause higher costs: contextual 𝜖-Greedy
computes |𝑀| dot products of dimension 𝑑, resulting in𝑂(|𝑀|𝑑) complexity. LinUCB and Thompson
Sampling must invert 𝑑 × 𝑑 matrices for each model, resulting in 𝑂(|𝑀|𝑑
3
) complexity which
is dominated by the matrix operations. Processing all 𝑇 queries sequentially results in a time
complexity 𝑂(𝑇 · (𝑙 + |𝑀|𝑑
3
)). With our experimental parameters (|𝑀| = 16, 𝑑 = 12), constant-time
transformer embedding dominates feature extraction at approximately 6-7 milliseconds per query,
and routing adds 0.02-1.21 milliseconds depending on the algorithm.
B.2 Space Complexity
Space complexity remains independent of 𝑇 as the system maintains only derived statistics. Feature
extraction requires 𝑂(𝐾 · 𝑑emb) for semantic cluster centroids and 𝑂(𝑛tasks · 𝑑emb) for classifier
weights. MAB algorithms vary in memory usage. Non-contextual 𝜖-Greedy requires 𝑂(|𝑀|) and
its contextual variants 𝑂(|𝑀| · 𝑑), while LinUCB and Thompson Sampling require 𝑂(|𝑀| · 𝑑
2
) to
store the matrices and vectors per model. With |𝑀| = 16, 𝑑 = 12, and 𝐾 = 3, total memory usage
remains negligible compared to employed language model weights.
B.3 Practical Implications
Our analysis reveals that feature extraction time is dominated by the constant-time transformer
embeddings due to their bounded sequence length, while the Flesch complexity calculation scales
linearly with query length but contributes minimally to overall runtime. For routing, the number
of models |𝑀| and context vector dimension 𝑑 affect execution time. The cubic scaling in 𝑑 for
contextual bandits appears concerning but remains manageable with 𝑑 = 12 when applying modern
libraries that optimize these matrix operations. Combined, our framework achieves linear time
scaling with respect to the primary input size 𝑇 while maintaining constant space complexity. The
combination of predictable per-query cost and fixed memory usage makes the system suitable for
long-running deployments processing millions of queries.
(SIGMETRCIS ’26)| (SIGMETRCIS ’26)| (SIGMETRCIS ’26)| |